Welcome my friend to
today's lecture on internet.
Ever felt like your
brain needed a power up?
This is it.
Concept explanation.
So what is this internet that
everyone from your auntie to
your bank manager talks about?
Think of it not as one single thing, but
a colossal worldwide network of networks.
It's a JBI of millions of private,
public, academic, and business networks
all tangled up, linked by everything
from fancy optical cables to the wifi
signal you are probably using right now.
At its heart, the
Internet's job is simple.
Let computers all over the world talk
to each other and share information.
How does it do this magic?
It breaks your data, say a cat video
into tiny little pieces called packets.
These packets are like little
adventurers, each traveling independently
across the network jungle, and then
miraculously reassembling in the
correct order at the destination.
This whole circus is managed
by rules or protocols mainly.
TCP ip, every device, your phone, your
laptop, has a unique IP address, which
is like its postal code, making sure
the data packets don't get lost and
end up at your neighbor's house To
make our lives easier, the domain name
system or DNS acts like a phone book,
translating easy names like google.com
into those number heavy IP addresses.
And the worldwide web, the www,
that's just one service, a system
of interconnected documents that
runs on top of the internet highway.
Real world relevance.
Now, why is this important for
something like banking array?
It's fundamental.
The internet is the very
backbone of modern finance.
It's what allows banks to offer all their
digital services and keep data secure.
Online banking, that's the
internet, letting you securely
manage your money from your couch.
It enables instant communication with
clients through email and video calls,
so no more waiting in long queues.
Financial professionals get
immediate access to market news
and updates, which is crucial.
It powers online customer support
with chat bots and virtual
assistance answering your queries at.
2:00 AM and for the bank's own operations,
it's vital for cloud storage, secure data
transfers, and creating robust backups.
It even helps with regulatory compliance
by providing quick access to all the
necessary guidelines and reporting tools.
Breakdown of question types.
All right, let's get into
strategy for your exam.
Questions on this topic
aren't there to trick you.
They just come in a
few predictable styles.
About 30% of the time you'll see questions
on basic definitions and concepts.
These tests, if you know fundamental
terms like internet, www browser, and so.
Then with about 25% frequency
come the acronyms and full forms.
They love asking for the
full form of things like
H-T-T-P-F-T-P-U-R-L and TCP, ip.
Next up with a 20% chance our questions
on protocols and their functions.
Asking you to match a protocol like SMTP
to its job, which is sending emails.
Questions on applications and
services appear about 15% of the
time, focusing on how the internet
is used, especially in banking.
Finally, there's a 10% slice for
security and threats covering basic
concepts like phishing and firewalls.
Formulas and tricks.
The best part, no math.
The tricks here are all
about smart memorization.
For acronyms, use association in HTTP,
edges for hypertext, T for transfer,
P for protocol, simple for protocols,
link them directly to their main job.
Just remember FTP is for file transfer.
It's that straightforward.
Also, try mentally categorizing
terms into groups like protocols or
applications to help your brain organize
the information for faster recall.
Methods of solving to tackle
these questions head on.
Use these methods for
definitions and acronyms.
It's about direct recall from your memory.
If a question asks about a protocol's
function, you can often deduce
it from its name or common use.
When faced with a real world scenario,
just map the situation to the most
relevant internet service and never
forget the classic method of elimination.
In multiple choice questions, get
rid of the obviously wrong answers
first to narrow down your choices.
Finally, for application-based
questions, understanding the context
is key to applying the right concept.
Shortcuts and smart techniques
want some clever shortcuts.
Create a flashcard system for all
important acronyms and key terms.
A quick daily review does wonders or
draw a mind map, put internet in the
center and branch out to protocols,
services, security, and so on.
This visually connects all the concepts.
Regularly practice with mock
questions on computer aptitude to
get comfortable with the patterns.
And a great technique is to focus
on keywords in the question.
If you see sending email, your
brain should immediately scream.
SMTP.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now, let's discuss the common traps.
Don't be the friend who confuses
the internet with the worldwide web.
The web is a service on the internet.
The internet is the whole infrastructure.
Another classic mixup is
IP address versus URL.
The IP is the numerical address.
The URL is the human friendly
name, like a website link.
People also often misidentify
protocol functions like confusing.
The one for.
Sending email with the
one for receiving it.
A big mistake is ignoring security
terms like phishing or malware
in the context of banking.
These are extremely important and
please avoid using outdated information.
The tech world moves fast.
WH framework summary.
So a quick summary.
What is it?
A massive global network of
interconnected computers.
Why does it exist to enable
worldwide communication and
access to digital services?
When is it used constantly for
almost everything we do online.
Where is it?
Accessible globally on all our devices.
Who uses it?
Basically everyone.
Individuals, businesses, and governments.
And how does it all work?
Through a set of standard rules.
The protocols like TCP IP that
manage how data zips around
fully worked out examples.
Let's see this in action.
Example, one question.
What is the full form of H-T-T-P-A
protocol widely used for transmitting
web pages over the internet?
A hyper text transfer protocol.
B, high transfer type protocol.
C hyperlink, text transmission program.
D, home text transfer program.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Step one is to understand the
question asks for the full
form of the acronym, HTTP.
This is a very common and
fundamental protocol for the web.
Step two is to recall the
full form from your memory.
HTTP stands for hypertext
transfer protocol.
Step three is to compare
this with the given options.
Option A is a perfect match.
The others are clearly incorrect.
So step four is to select
the correct option, answer a
hypertext transfer protocol.
Example two question.
Which of the following protocols
is primarily used for sending
emails over the internet?
A-F-T-P-B-H-T-T-P-C-S-M-T-P-D-D-N-S
understand the question
before moving to explanation.
First, analyze the question.
It specifically asks for the
protocol used for sending emails.
Second, recall the functions
of the protocols listed.
FTP is for file transfer.
HTTP is for webpages, SMTP or Simple Mail
Transfer Protocol is for sending emails.
DNS is for translating domain names.
Third, you match the
function to the protocol.
The one for sending mail is SMTP.
Therefore, the fourth step is
to choose the correct option.
Answer C-S-M-T-P example three
question in the context of banking.
How does the internet primarily
facilitate services like NEFT
and R-T-G-S-A by providing
physical cash transaction points.
B, by enabling real-time
electronic fund transfers.
C, by allowing customers to
open physical bank branches.
D by printing, physical bank statements.
Understand the question before moving to
explanation First, understand the terms.
NEFT and RTGS are electronic
fund transfer systems.
Second, relate this to
the Internet's function.
The internet is the network that
lets banks process these electronic
transactions securely and instantly.
Third, evaluate the options.
Physical cash points are the
opposite of what N-E-F-D-R-T GS do.
Enabling electronic transfers perfectly
describes the Internet's role.
Opening branches and printing statements
are not the primary function here.
So the final step is to select the most
accurate option, answer B by enabling
realtime electronic fund transfers.
Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.